# Which Party Has Moved?

May 2nd, 2022

On his newly purchased platform, Elon Musk tweeted a meme about the political polarization in the United States that has occurred in the past two decades. In the meme, Mr. Musk suggests that while he has stayed “politically moderate” from the time of 2008 to 2021, the political left has rapidly shifted leftward, leaving him closer now to the right side of the spectrum. Mr. Musk described himself in 2018 as a “registered independent” and “politically moderate,” however many of his political opinions seem to lend to the side that supports his business endeavors. Moreover, the political meme that Elon Musk tweeted does not tell the full story of polarization in the United States.

Other graphics, generated from survey and poll data, shows both the median Democrat and the median Republican shifting away from the middle. A graphic created by the Pew Research Center shows in 1994, 64% of Republicans are more conservative than the median Democrat, and 70% of Democrats are more liberal than the median Republican. In 2004, the numbers were 70% of Republicans and 68% of Democrats. But in 2014, polarization hit, with 92% of Republicans being more conservative than the median Democrat and 94% of Democrats being more liberal than the median Republican. And in the current year of 2022, we can assume that this political gap has grown.

We can even see this polarization in the U.S. government. In a graphic created by Renzo Lucioni at GovTrack.us, members of the U.S. The Senate is connected to one another if they have cast the same votes on the same piece of legislation. Three times were graphed: 101st Congress in the 1989 session, 107th Congress in the 2002 session, and 113th Congress in the 2013 session. The 101st Congress shows a clustered graph with many Senators and even more connections between them. The 107th Congress shows fewer and the 113th Congress gives even fewer than that. This means that even our Senators are beginning to shift away from the center, and even further away from their co-workers on the other side of the aisle.

It is clearly shown that in all aspects of the political machine, polarization between Democrats and Republicans has been increasing over the past two decades. But what does this mean? What is catalyzing this polarization? And how do we stop it, if we even want to?

It is extremely hard to analyze these trends with any high level of certainty given the complex machine United States politics is, how hard humans are to predict, and the number of other systems that affect people’s opinions like news media and global affairs.

But given that, it is safe to say that news media and how it has changed over the years has had a non-zero impact on the polarization in the United States. News in the past was disgusted by the American people in a totally different way. There were no smartphones for instant updates, no 24-hour news cycles showing anything to grab people’s attention, and much of the real news across all stations were allocated to a specific time in the evening. As compared to now, attention-grabbing, emotion-inducing content is now at everyone’s fingertips. Moreover, because these news media companies make money from having people view their content, their goals and incentives are to grab people’s attention by any means necessary. One of the best ways to get their attention is by inducing fear, or anger, or showing content with which they agree. These articles that are catered toward these goals make the American people fearful of what the other side will do, angry at the other side's current actions, and place them in a group-think bubble of thought. And all of these actions point toward a more polarized population.
