# China's Economy

November 5th, 2021

To talk about China’s economy, we must first discuss the Chinese government and its interaction with its economy. Any praise or hatred about the functionality of China’s economy must also be aware of the strong and direct influence that the Chinese government uses to manipulate its economy. Like any government organization, the Chinese government is a complex one. And understandings its functionality will help put into context the functionality of its economy.

First, let us get a base understanding of the United States government’s relation to its free-market economy. Most interactions fall under Congress’ enumerated powers to tax and make laws under the Constitution’s Commerce Clause. The executive branch uses its administrative state to apply regulations, which also stem from Congress’ authority to make laws in a certain area. All actions from both branches are constrained within the Constitution, with its Bill of Rights, which is interpreted by the judicial branch.

Comparing this to the Chinese government, there are loose similarities but many functional differences. The countries have a similar 3 branch system, however, the one-party rule and other examples of how the Chinese government rules (i.e. the one-child policy) show that it wields an immense amount of governing power.

From the start of the Mao Zedong era and increasingly so from modern President Xi Jinping, the Chinese government has had a direct role in private businesses. Established in 2017, a state law reads that “any organisation and citizen shall support and cooperate in national intelligence work.” Many laws of this type allow the Chinese government to directly influence and guide the private sector. After a private Chinese company was caught spying on the United States, the director of the US National Counterintelligence and Security Center asserted that “Chinese company relationships with the Chinese government aren’t like private sector company relationships with governments in the west.”

We can see the Chinese government's direct connection to its economy. So given any economic growth seen, one must also take into consideration the extreme human rights issues that the Chinese government allows to facilitate this growth. The increase in one comes with a decrease in the other.

We can first talk about China’s labor conditions. Being the largest exporter of goods in the world, an impressive economic feat, the Chinese labor force must have some different characteristics from your average country’s. So how are China’s labor conditions? Reported in 2016, cases of forced child labor were detected in a garment factory. Another report of a brink factory forcing disabled people to do physically demanding work without pay came in 2016. Along with all the other reports from Nike using Chinese slave labor to manufacture its shoes to Apple knowingly using Chinese child labor to create its phones, the working conditions for the poor in China are that of slave labor.

As the largest exporter, China needs a wealth of raw materials to use in manufacturing. One way to get these raw materials is to have mining operations within China. The northwest region of Xinjiang is home to a rare form of quartz that is used to create solar panels. To extract these materials from the earth, China has decided to “relocate” the Uyghur Muslims who live there. Framed as relocation and re-education, the China government, for the benefit of its economy, has been the sole perpetrator of genocide. China, for the purpose of collecting raw materials, opening up a trading path to other mainland East Asian countries, and for a culture of islamophobia, has decided to commit genocide on the Uyghur people.

The rapid growth in China’s economy, having a 2.3 percent growth in 2020 during the pandemic and being the only major economy to do so, comes not from having intelligence, and a highly functioning economic policy, but from the decreased human rights of its citizens. We cannot look at the impressive growth of the Chinese economy in a vacuum. China could not be the largest exporter in the world, with every major global company wanting to use its workers for manufacturing if its labor wasn’t the product of modern slavery.
